# Unified Discrete Diffusion for Categorical Data

Lingxiao Zhao, Xueying Ding Carnegie Mellon University lingxiaozlx@gmail.com xding2@andrew.cmu.edu

Lijun Yu Carnegie Mellon University lijun@lj-y.com

Leman Akoglu Carnegie Mellon University lakoglu@andrew.cmu.edu

## Abstract

Discrete diffusion models have attracted significant attention for their application to naturally discrete data, such as language and graphs. While discrete-time discrete diffusion has been established for some time, it was only recently that Campbell et al. [2022] introduced the first framework for continuous-time discrete diffusion. However, their training and backward sampling processes significantly differ from those of the discrete-time version, requiring nontrivial approximations for tractability. In this paper, we first introduce a series of generalizations and simplifications of the variational lower bound (VLB) that facilitate more accurate and easier optimization both discrete- and continuous-time discrete diffusion. We further establish a unification of discrete- and continuous-time discrete diffusion through shared forward process and backward parameterization. Thanks to this unification, the continuous-time diffusion can now utilize the exact and efficient backward process developed for the discrete-time case, avoiding the need for costly and inexact approximations. Similarly, the discrete-time diffusion now also employ the MCMC corrector, which was previously exclusive to the continuous-time case. Extensive experiments and ablations demonstrate the significant improvement.

## 1 Introduction

Deep generative models have taken the world by storm, capturing complex data distributions and producing realistic data, from human-like text [Brown et al., 2020, Li et al., 2022, OpenAI, 2023] and natural looking images [Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021, Ramesh et al., 2022, Zhang et al., 2023] to novel compounds like molecules and drugs [Kang and Cho, 2018, Li et al., 2021] and video synthesis [Ho et al., 2022]. Denoising diffusion models [Ho et al., 2020b], a powerful class of generative models, are trained through a forward diffusion process that gradually adds noise to the training samples, and a backward process that denoises these diffusion trajectories. New data are then generated by sampling from the noise distribution and employing the trained model for recursive denoising.

Discrete diffusion for categorical data has two modeling paradigms: discrete-time and continuoustime. The former discretizes time such that backward denoising is learned only at pre-specified time points. This limits generation, which can only “jump back” through fixed points. In contrast, continuous-time case allows a path through any point in range, and often yields higher sample quality. Current literature on discrete-time discrete diffusion is relatively established, while only recently Campbell et al. [2022] introduced the first continuous-time discrete diffusion framework. While groundbreaking, their their loss requires multiple network evaluations during training. Moreover, the exact sampling through their learned backward process is extremely tedious for multi-dimensional variables. Due to mathematically complicated and computationally demanding formulations, Campbell et al. [2022] propose nontrivial approximations for tractability with unknown potential errors.

In this paper, we introduce a series of improvements to two critical aspects of discrete diffusion: loss computation and backward sampling, for both discrete- and continuous-time scenarios. What is more, for the first time, we show that the discrete-time and continuous-time discrete diffusion can be unified together such that they share exactly the same forward diffusion and backward sampling process. We elaborate on the details and their benefits as follows:

• Loss simplifcation and generalization: We derive significantly simplified yet exact VLB calculations for both discrete&continuous-time discrete diffusion, taking into account the properties of categorical data. Our simplified formulations allow both forward and backward probabilities to accommodate any noise distribution element-wisely, which is particularly attractive for multi-element objects where each element can exhibit a different noise distribution.

• Efficient backward sampling: We present a closed-form backward probability $p _ { \theta } ( \pmb { x } _ { s } | \pmb { x } _ { t } )$ for all $s < t$ with reconstruction-based model parameterization, paving the way for VLB simplification and accelerated backward sampling, initially derived in the discrete-time case. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this improved backward process can be applied to continuous-time case, eliminating the need for the costly and inexact sampling approximations in Campbell et al. [2022].

• Unification: We demonstrate that continuous-time diffusion can share the exact same forward process as discrete-time diffusion for any noise distribution. This unified forward process, along with shared backward parameterization, leads to a unification of both forward and backward processes for discrete-& continuous-time cases. This offers mutual benefits: discrete-time diffusion can utilize continuous time’s MCMC corrector to enhance performance, while continuous-time diffusion can employ fast and exact backward sampling derived in discrete-time case.

We present both discrete-time (§2) and continuous-time (§3) discrete diffusion in a self-contained manner, accompanied by easy-to-use open-source code at https://github.com/LingxiaoShawn/ USD3. We explicitly mark our novel contributions in (sub)sections with summarization.

## 2 Discrete-time Discrete Diffusion

Notation: Let $\mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \sim p _ { \mathrm { d a t a } } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ be the random variable of observed data with underlying distribution $p _ { \mathrm { d a t a } } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ . Let $\mathbf { x } _ { t } \sim q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ be the latent variable at time t of a single-element object, like a pixel of an image or a node/edge of a graph, with maximum time T . Let $\mathbf { x } _ { t \mid s } \sim q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { s } )$ be the conditional random variable. We model the forward diffusion process independently for each element of the object, while the backward denoising process is modeled jointly for all elements of the object. For simplicity and clarity of presentation, we first assume that the object only has 1 element and extend to multi-element object later. Let $\mathbf { \Delta x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D }$ denote the object with D elements, and $\mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { i }$ be the i-th element of latent object at time t. We assume all random variables take categorical values from $\{ 1 , 2 , . . . , K \}$ . Let $e _ { k } \in \{ 0 , 1 \} ^ { K }$ be the one-hot encoding of category k. For a random variable x, we use x denoting its one-hot encoded sample where $\pmb { x } \in \{ e _ { 1 } , . . . , e _ { K } \}$ . Also, we interchangeably use $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { s } ) , q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } = \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { s } = \mathbf { x } _ { s } )$ , and $q _ { t \mid s } ( \pmb { x } _ { t } | \pmb { x } _ { s } )$ when no ambiguity is introduced. Let $\langle \bar { \cdot } , \cdot \rangle$ denote inner product. All vectors are column-wise vectors.

## 2.1 Graphical Model View of Diffusion Models

Diffusion models can be represented by latent variable graphical models (see Appx. Fig. 1). We can write the joint probability as $p _ { \boldsymbol { \theta } } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 : T } ) : = p _ { \boldsymbol { \theta } } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } , \mathbf { x } _ { 1 } , . . . , \mathbf { x } _ { T } ) = p _ { \boldsymbol { \theta } } ( \mathbf { x } _ { T } ) \prod _ { t = 1 } ^ { T } p _ { \boldsymbol { \theta } } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ using the Markov condition. Parameters θ are learned by maximizing the loglikehood of the observed variable $\mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \colon$ log pθ(x0) = log $\begin{array} { r } { \int p _ { \theta } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 : T } \big ) d \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } } \end{array}$ . However the marginalization is intractable, and instead the following variational lower bound (VLB) is used.

$$
\log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = \log \int q ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \frac { p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 : T } ) } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } d \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } \geq \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \big [ \log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 : T } ) - \log q ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \big ] .\tag{1}
$$

The above inequality holds for any conditional probability $q \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \big )$ and finding the best $q \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \big )$ to tighten the bound is the inference problem in graphical models (i.e. E step in EM algorithm). Exact inference is intractable, thus $q \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \big )$ in diffusion models is fixed or chosen specifically to simplify the learning objective. To simplify Eq. (1), it is important to assume $q \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \big )$ is decomposable. The typical assumption is $\begin{array} { r } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = \prod _ { t = 1 } ^ { T } q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } ) } \end{array}$ [Ho et al., 2020a], which we also adopt. Others that have been explored include $\begin{array} { r } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = \prod _ { t = 1 } ^ { T } q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \end{array}$ [Song et al., 2021a].

Assuming $\begin{array} { r } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 : T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = \prod _ { t = 1 } ^ { T } q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } ) } \end{array}$ , Eq. (1) can be simplified as the following

$$
\underbrace { \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \left[ \log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { 1 } ) \right] } _ { - \mathcal { L } _ { 1 } ( \theta ) } - \underbrace { D _ { \mathrm { K L } } \big ( q ( \mathbf { x } _ { T } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \big ) \big | p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { T } ) \big ) } _ { \mathcal { L } _ { \mathrm { p i a r } } } - \sum _ { t = 2 } ^ { T } \underbrace { \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \left[ D _ { \mathrm { K L } } \big ( q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \big ) \big | \big | p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) \right] } _ { \mathcal { L } _ { \epsilon } ( \theta ) }\tag{2}
$$

Where $\mathcal { L } _ { \mathrm { p r i o r } } \approx 0 .$ , since $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { T } ) \approx q ( \mathbf { x } _ { T } \vert \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ is designed as a fixed noise distribution that is easy to sample from. (See Appx. §A.1 for derivation.) To compute Eq. (2), we need to formalize distributions $\left( i \right) q \mathopen { } \mathclose \bgroup \left( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \aftergroup \egroup \right)$ and $( i i ) q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ , as well as (iii) the parameterization of $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ . We specify these respectively in §2.2.1, §2.2.2, and §2.2.3.

## 2.2 Components of Discrete-time Discrete Diffusion

After reviewing the forward process for discrete diffusion (§2.2.1), we contribute a series of analytical simplifications for various components (§2.2.2, §2.2.3) of the VLB, providing exact closed-form formulation in §2.2.4, as well as an approximated loss for easier optimization in §2.2.5. We present fast backward sampling in Appx.§A.8, and give the extension to multi-element case in Appx. §A.9.

## 2.2.1 The Forward Diffusion Process

We assume each discrete random variable $\mathbf { x } _ { t }$ has a categorical distribution, i.e. $\mathbf x _ { t } \sim \mathrm { C a t } ( \mathbf x _ { t } ; p )$ with $\pmb { p } \in [ 0 , 1 ] ^ { K }$ and $\mathbf { 1 } ^ { \top } p = 1$ . One can verify that $p ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } = \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { \top } p ,$ , or simply $p ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = \pmb { x } _ { t } ^ { \top } \pmb { p } .$ As shown in [Hoogeboom et al., 2021, Austin et al., 2021], the forward process with discrete variables $q \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } \big )$ at t step can be represented as a transition matrix $Q _ { t } \doteq [ 0 , 1 ] ^ { K \times K }$ such that $[ Q _ { t } ] _ { i j } = q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } = e _ { j } \lvert \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } = e _ { i } )$ . Then, we can write the distribution explicitly as

$$
q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } ) = \mathbf { C } \mathbf { a t } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ; Q _ { t } ^ { \top } \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } )\tag{3}
$$

Given transition matrices $Q _ { 1 } , . . . , Q _ { T }$ , the t-step marginal distribution conditioning on $s , \forall t > s$ is

$$
\begin{array} { r } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { s } ) = \operatorname { C a t } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ; \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } ^ { \mid } \mathbf { x } _ { s } ) , \mathrm { ~ w i t h ~ } \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } = Q _ { s + 1 } . . . Q _ { t } \ . } \end{array}\tag{4}
$$

The s-step posterior distribution conditioning on $\mathbf { x } _ { \mathrm { 0 } }$ and t-step can be derived as

$$
q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = \frac { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { s } ) q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } = \mathrm { C a t } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ; \frac { \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } \mathbf { x } _ { t } \odot \overline { { Q } } _ { s } ^ { \top } \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } { { \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { \top } \overline { { Q } } _ { t } ^ { \top } \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } } ) , \forall t > s .\tag{5}
$$

The above formulations are valid (derivation in Appx. $\ S \mathbf { A } . 3 \ )$ for any transition matrices $Q _ { 1 } , . . . , Q _ { T }$ However, to achieve uninformative noise $\mathbf { x } _ { T } , \{ Q _ { i } \} _ { i = 1 } ^ { T }$ should be chosen such that every row of $\overline { { Q } } _ { t } = \overline { { Q } } _ { t \vert 0 }$ converge to the same known stationary distribution when t becomes large enough (at T ). Let the known stationary distribution be ${ \bf m } _ { 0 } \sim { \bf C a t } ( { \bf m } _ { 0 } ; m )$ . Then, the constraint can be stated as

$$
\operatorname * { l i m } _ { t  T } \overline { { Q } } _ { t } = { \bf 1 } m ^ { \top } .\tag{6}
$$

In addition, this paper focuses on nominal data (see Appx. §A.2) where categories are unordered and only equality comparison is defined. Hence, no ordering prior except checking equality should be used to define $Q _ { t } { } ^ { 2 }$ . To achieve the desired convergence on nominal data while keeping the flexibility of choosing any categorical stationary distribution ${ \bf m } _ { 0 } \sim { \bf C a t } ( { \bf m } _ { 0 } ; m )$ , we define $Q _ { t }$ as

$$
Q _ { t } = \alpha _ { t } I + ( 1 - \alpha _ { t } ) \mathbf { 1 } m ^ { \top } ,\tag{7}
$$

where $\alpha _ { t } \in [ 0 , 1 ]$ . This results in the accumulated transition matrix $\overline { { Q } } _ { t \vert s }$ being equal to

$$
\overline { { { Q } } } _ { t \vert s } = \overline { { { \alpha } } } _ { t \vert s } I + ( 1 - \overline { { { \alpha } } } _ { t \vert s } ) \mathbf { 1 } m ^ { \top } , \forall t > s ~ ,\tag{8}
$$

where $\begin{array} { r } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \vert s } = \prod _ { i = s + 1 } ^ { t } \alpha _ { i } } \end{array}$ . Note that $\overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } = \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \vert 0 } = \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \vert s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s }$ . We can achieve the uninformative noise with satisfying the constraint Eq. (6) by picking $\alpha _ { t }$ such that lim $\mathbf { \Phi } _ { 1 _ { t }  T } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } = 0$ .

## 2.2.2 Analytical Form of $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$

The formulation in Eq. (7) can be used to simplify $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ . We provide a general formulation of $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ for any s, t with $0 < s < t \leq T$ , which will be useful for unifying with continuoustime diffusion. One can recover $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ by setting s as t−1.

Proposition 2.1 (Zheng et al. [2023]). For both discrete- and continuous-time discrete diffusion, we can write the conditional distribution as

$$
q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { C a t \Big ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ; ( 1 - \lambda _ { t | s } ) \cdot \mathbf { x } _ { t } + \lambda _ { t | s } \cdot m \Big ) } & { w h e n ~ \mathbf { x } _ { t } = x _ { 0 } } \\ { C a t \Big ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ; ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) \cdot \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } + \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } \cdot \mathbf { x } _ { t } + \mu _ { t | s } ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) \cdot m \Big ) } & { w h e n ~ \mathbf { x } _ { t } \ne x _ { 0 } } \end{array} \right.\tag{9}
$$

where $\begin{array} { r } { \lambda _ { t | s } : = \frac { ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } ) ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) \langle m , { \pmb x } _ { t } \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } + ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } ) \langle m , { \pmb x } _ { t } \rangle } , \mu _ { t | s } : = \frac { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } } } \end{array}$

We remark that the above formulation is originally presented in Zheng et al. [2023] with $s = t - 1$ Appx. §A.3 gives the detailed derivation of the probability’s formulation.

## 2.2.3 Contrib. 1: Analytical Form of $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$

The literature has explored three different parameterizations of $p _ { \theta } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } \big | \mathbf { x } _ { t } \big ) \colon ( 1 )$ parameterizing $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ directly; (2) parameterizing $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ with $f _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ such that $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = \mathbf { C a t } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ; f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) )$ and letting $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) ) ;$ ; and (3) parameterizing pθ $\left( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } \right)$ with $f _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ and then marginalizing $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ such that $\begin{array} { r } { p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } \vert \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = \sum _ { \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } \vert \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \vert \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) } \end{array}$

Method (1) does not reuse any distribution in forward process, and hence is less effective. Method (2) has been widely used for continuous diffusion models as in Ho et al. [2020a] and Song et al. [2021a], and some discrete diffusion models like in Hoogeboom et al. [2021] and Zheng et al. [2023]. It avoids marginalization and works effectively for continuous diffusion. However for discrete diffusion, as shown in Eq. (9), sample $\mathbf { x } _ { \mathrm { 0 } }$ determines which categorical distribution should be used, which cannot be determined without the true $\mathbf { x } _ { \mathrm { 0 } }$ . Some heuristics have been proposed in Zheng et al. [2023], however those can have a large gap to the true $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ , leading to an inaccurate sampling process.

Method (3) has been used in Austin et al. [2021] by directly marginalizing out $\mathbf { x } _ { \mathrm { 0 } }$ , which introduces additional computational cost in both loss function computation and sampling process as the formulation of $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ has not been simplified to a closed-form distribution. In this paper, we show that method (3) parameterization can be simplified to a clean formulation of categorical distribution.

Proposition 2.2. The parameterization of $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ can be simplified for any $0 < s < t \leq T$ as

$$
p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = C a t \Big ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ; ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) \cdot f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { t } ) + ( \mu _ { t | s } { \overline { { \alpha } } } _ { t | s } + \gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta } ) \cdot { \pmb x } _ { t } + ( \mu _ { t | s } ( 1 - { \overline { { \alpha } } } _ { t | s } ) - \gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta } ) \cdot m \Big )\tag{10}
$$

where $\gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta }$ is affected by $f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) , \gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta } : = ( \mu _ { t | s } - \lambda _ { t | s } - \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) \langle f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \rangle$

The detailed proof is in Appx. §A.4. Notice that $f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { t } )$ is a parameterized neural network with $\mathbf { 1 } ^ { T } f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \pmb { x } _ { t } ) = 1$ . As we show next, the above formulation simplifies the negative VLB loss computation greatly (§2.2.4), further motivates an approximated loss that is much easier to optimize (§2.2.5), and accelerates the sampling process through reparameterization (§A.8).

## 2.2.4 Loss Function

With $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ in Eq. (9) and $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ in Eq. (10), the $\mathcal { L } _ { t } ( \boldsymbol { \theta } )$ in Eq. (2) can be written as

$$
\mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \Big [ \delta _ { \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } D _ { \mathrm { K L } } \big ( q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } = \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \| p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) \big ) + ( 1 - \delta _ { \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } ) D _ { \mathrm { K L } } \big ( q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } \not = \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \| p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) \big ) \Big ]\tag{11}
$$

where $\delta _ { \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } }$ denotes the Kronecker delta of $\mathbf { x } _ { t }$ and $\mathbf { x } _ { 0 } . \ d ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } = \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ and $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } \neq \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ represent the first and second categorical distribution in $\operatorname { E q . } \left( 9 \right)$ , respectively.

Apart from negative VLB, another commonly employed auxiliary loss is the cross-entropy (CE) loss between $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ and $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ , which measures the reconstruction quality.

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \mathcal { L } _ { t } ^ { C E } ( \theta ) : = \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } [ - \log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) ] } \end{array}\tag{12}
$$

Eq. (12) and Eq. (11) share the same global minima with $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ being the true posterior $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ However they have different optimization landscape; and thus under limited data and network capacity, which loss is be easier to minimize is unknown [Tewari and Bartlett, 2007, Demirkaya et al., 2020].

## 2.2.5 Contrib. 2: Further Loss Simplification for Easier Optimization

While Eq. (11) is the exact negative VLB loss, in practice we find it harder to minimize than $\mathcal { L } _ { t } ^ { C E }$ In this section, we first derive a much simpler, approximated loss by observing a relation between $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ and $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ . We then show that coefficient simplification and $\mathcal { L } _ { t } ^ { \widetilde { C } E }$ are both valuable for optimizing a general negative VLB where only partial time steps are observed. We combine all designs to derive the final approximated loss, denoted as $\tilde { \mathcal { L } } _ { t }$

Proposition 2.3. For any $0 < s < t \leq T _ { \cdot }$ , with $\mathbf { x } _ { \mathrm { 0 } }$ known, $\triangle p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ is defined as

$$
p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) - q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) [ f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) - { \mathbf { x } } _ { 0 } + \phi _ { t | s } \langle f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \mathbf { x } } _ { t } ) - { \mathbf { x } } _ { 0 } , { \mathbf { x } } _ { t } \rangle ( { \mathbf { x } } _ { t } - m ) ] ,\tag{13}
$$

where $\begin{array} { r } { \phi _ { t | s } : = \frac { ( 1 - \bar { \alpha } _ { s } ) \bar { \alpha } _ { t | s } } { \bar { \alpha } _ { t } + ( 1 - \bar { \alpha } _ { t } ) \langle \mathbf { x } _ { t } , m \rangle } } \end{array}$

Proposition 2.3 shows that the distribution difference between $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ and $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ has a closed-form formulation. (See Appx. §A.5 for the proof.) With it, we can apply the Taylor expansion (up to second order) to approximate the KL divergence directly (See Appx. §A.6.)

$$
D _ { \mathrm { K L } } \big ( q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \big | \big | p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) \big ) \approx \sum _ { \mathbf { x } _ { s } } \frac { | \triangle p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) | ^ { 2 } } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) }\tag{14}
$$

The above formulation along with prop.2.3 are valid for any $0 < s < t \leq T$ We next show that minimizing divergence between q and pθ at any s and t is also valid, as it is inside a general negative VLB with partial time steps. The initial version of the VLB is derived under the assumption that observations are made at every time step. Its backward denoising process is designed to advance by a single time step during each generation step for best generation quality. Let us consider a more general case where only partial time steps are observed in the forward process, then, minimizing its negative VLB can help improve generation quality with fewer steps. Assuming only $\mathbf { x } _ { s }$ and $\mathbf { x } _ { t }$ are observed, where $0 < s < t \leq T$ , a derivation analogous to that of Eq. (2) can show that

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \geq - D _ { \mathrm { K L } } [ q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \| p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) ] + \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } [ \log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { s } ) ] - D _ { \mathrm { K L } } [ q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) \| p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) ] , } \end{array}\tag{15}
$$

where the first divergence term between the prior and posterior quantifies the quality of the backward denoising process from T to t. The second term represents the CE loss, $\mathcal { L } _ { s } ^ { \mathrm { C E } }$ , which influences the generation quality from time s to time 0. The final term is given by Eq. (14), and contributes to the generation process from t to s. (See Appx. §A.7 for proof.)

This generalized formulation of the VLB highlights the significance of the CE loss and the alignment between $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { s } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ and $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ at any observed times s and t. While CE loss does not have a coefficient that depends on noise schedules and time, changing s and t or noise schedule (which determines $\bar { \alpha } _ { t } )$ during training will greatly impact the scale of the term in Eq. (14). By rendering the loss scaling term independent of time and the noise schedule, the minimization of this adjusted loss concurrently leads to the minimization of the original loss in Eq. (14) for any given s and t. Hence, by removing the sensitive scale $\frac { ( 1 - \mu _ { t \mid s } ) ^ { 2 } } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } \mid \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) }$ in Eq. (14), we reformulate the loss as

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \mathcal { L } _ { t } ^ { 2 } : = \| f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \pmb { x } _ { t } ) - \pmb { x } _ { 0 } + \phi _ { t | s } \langle f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \pmb { x } _ { t } ) - \pmb { x } _ { 0 } , \pmb { x } _ { t } \rangle ( \pmb { x } _ { t } - m ) \| _ { 2 } ^ { 2 } , } \end{array}\tag{16}
$$

where we can further clip $\phi _ { t | s }$ to min $( 1 , \phi _ { t | s } )$ for minimal scaling influence. It is important to note that while we have modified the coefficient to be invariant to the noise schedule and time s to effectively minimize Eq. (14) at any t and $s ,$ a similar approach to coefficient revision has been previously explored in Ho et al. [2020a], Karras et al. [2022], primarily to facilitate an easier optimization by achieving a balance of terms in the loss function.

Overall, we have the final approximated loss as $\tilde { \mathcal { L } } _ { t } ( \theta ) = \mathcal { L } _ { t } ^ { 2 } ( \theta ) + \mathcal { L } _ { t } ^ { C E } ( \theta )$ ) .We find that in practice this loss is much easier to optimize than the original exact negative VLB for more complicated distributions, leading to faster convergence and improved generation quality.

## 3 Continuous-time Discrete Diffusion

Despite being simple, discrete-time diffusion limits the generation process as we can only “jump back” through fixed time points. Recent works generalize continuous-state diffusion models to continuous-time [Song et al., 2021b]. This generalization enables great flexibility in backward generation as one can “jump back” through any time in [0, T ] with improved sample quality.

Nevertheless, generalizing discrete-state diffusion model from discrete-time to continuous-time is nontrivial, as the score-matching based technique [Song et al., 2021b] in continuous-state models requires the score function $\nabla _ { \mathbf { x } } \log p _ { t } ( \mathbf { x } )$ to be available. This function, however, is evidently nonexistent for discrete distributions. Recently, Campbell et al. [2022] presented the first continuous-time diffusion model for discrete data. It formulates the forward process through a Continuous Time Markov Chain (CTMC) and aims at learning a reverse CTMC that matches the marginal distribution with the forward CTMC at any time t. While being theoretically solid, the formulation in Campbell et al. [2022] has two problems: (1) the negative VLB loss of matching the forward and backward CTMCs is analytically complicated and hard to implement; and (2) the exact sampling through the learned backward CTMC is unrealistic. Campbell et al. [2022] propose approximate solutions, which however, trade off computational tractability with unknown errors and sample quality. SDDM Sun et al. [2023] takes a different approach with ratio matching Hyvärinen [2007], Lyu [2009], which is the generalization of score matching to discrete data. However, it needs a specific model architecture. Lou et al. [2024] advances ratio matching, yielding a loss that requires only a single model pass. Interestingly, this loss is similar to ours in formulation, despite originating from a different angle.

In this paper, we build on the CTMC formulation in Campbell et al. [2022], and show that the loss can be analytically simplified for nominal data. This simplification also inspires an improved MCMC corrector with closed-form formulation. For problem (2), we argue that the difficulty arises from directly using the learned backward CTMC’s transition rate. Instead, realizing that the reverse transition rate is computed based on the learned $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ , we propose to compute $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ through $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ without using the transition rate matrix. This avoids the approximation error of sampling directly from the backward CTMC and greatly simplifies the generation process.

Remarkably, with the new formulation of generation, we show that the continuous-time and discretetime diffusion models can be unified together, with exactly the same forward diffusion and now also backward generation process. Moreover, we demonstrate that this unification offers mutual benefits: the continuous-time diffusion can leverage the swift and precise sampling formulation derived from the discrete-time case (as detailed in $\ S \mathbf { A } . 8 )$ , while the discrete-time diffusion can utilize the MCMC corrector from the continuous-time scenario (see Appx. §A.17 and §A.19.6).

## 3.1 Background: Continuous-Time Markov Chain

CTMC generalizes Markov chain from discrete- to continuous-time via the Markov property: $\mathbf { x } _ { t _ { 1 } }$ ⊥⊥ $\mathbf { x } _ { t _ { 3 } } \mid \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { 2 } } , \forall t _ { 1 } < t _ { 2 } < t _ { 3 } .$ Anderson [2012] provides an introduction to time-homogeneous CTMC. It can be derived from discrete-time Markov chain by increasing the number of time stamps N to infinite while keeping the total time T fixed. Specifically, we can define $\begin{array} { r } { \triangle t = \frac { T } { N } , t _ { i } = i \triangle \bar { t } . } \end{array}$ , and a discrete-time Markov chain characterized by transition probability $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { i } } | \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { i - 1 } } )$ and transition matrix $Q _ { t _ { i } }$ with $[ Q _ { t _ { i } } ] _ { j k } = q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { i } } = e _ { k } | \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { i - 1 } } = e _ { j } )$ . By setting N to infinite, the transition probability $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { i } } | \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { i - 1 } } )$ converges to 0, hence is not suitable for describing CTMC. Instead, CTMC is fully characterized by its transition rate $r _ { t } ( \pmb { y } | \pmb { x } )$ , s.t.

$$
r _ { t } ( y | x ) = \operatorname* { l i m } _ { N \to \infty } \frac { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { i } } = y | \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { i - 1 } } = x ) - \delta _ { x , y } } { t _ { i } - t _ { i - 1 } } = \operatorname* { l i m } _ { \triangle t \to 0 } \frac { q _ { t | t - \triangle t } ( y | x ) - \delta _ { x , y } } { \triangle t } .\tag{17}
$$

As the name suggests, $r _ { t } ( \pmb { y } | \pmb { x } )$ measures the change rate of the transition probability of moving from state x to state y at time t in the direction of the process. The corresponding transition rate matrix $R _ { t }$ with $[ R _ { t } ] _ { i j } = r _ { t } ( e _ { j } | e _ { i } )$ fully determines the underlying stochastic process. A CTMC’s transition probabilities satisfy the Kolmogorov equations [Kolmogoroff, 1931] (see Appx. §A.10), which have unique solution. As Rindos et al. [1995] stated, when $R _ { t _ { 1 } }$ and $R _ { t _ { 2 } }$ commute (i.e. $R _ { t _ { 1 } } R _ { t _ { 2 } } = R _ { t _ { 2 } } R _ { t _ { 1 } } )$ for any $t _ { 1 } , t _ { 2 } ,$ , the transition probability matrix can be written as $\begin{array} { r } { \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } = \exp \Big ( \int _ { s } ^ { t } R _ { a } d a \Big ) } \end{array}$ , where $\begin{array} { r } { \exp ( M ) : = \sum _ { k = 0 } ^ { \infty } \frac { M ^ { k } } { k ! } } \end{array}$ . The commutative property of $R _ { t }$ can be achieved by choosing $R _ { t } = \beta ( t ) R _ { b }$ where $R _ { b } \in \mathbb { R } ^ { K \times K }$ is a time-independent base rate matrix.

## 3.2 Contrib. 3: Simplified Forward & Backward CTMCs that Connect to Discrete-Time Case

Forward CTMC. Two properties are needed for modeling the forward process: P1) the process can converge to an easy-to-sample stationary distribution at final time $T ;$ and P2) the conditional marginal distribution $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ can be obtained analytically for efficient training. As given above, P2) can be achieved by choosing commutative transition rate matrices with $R _ { t } = \beta ( t ) R _ { b }$

We next show that property P1), i.e. lim $\mathsf { l } _ { t  T } \overline { { Q } } _ { t \mid 0 } = \overline { { Q } } _ { T \mid 0 } = \mathsf { 1 } m ^ { \top }$ for some stationary distribution m, can be achieved by choosing $R _ { b } = \mathbf { 1 } m ^ { \top } - I .$ , which is a valid transition rate matrix with the property $( - R _ { b } ) ^ { 2 } = ( \dot { - } R _ { b } )$ (see derivation in Appx. §A.11). Then we have

$$
\overline { { Q } } _ { t \vert s } = \exp ( \overline { { \beta } } _ { t \vert s } R _ { b } ) = e ^ { - \overline { { \beta } } _ { t \vert s } } I + ( 1 - e ^ { - \overline { { \beta } } _ { t \vert s } } ) \mathbf { 1 } m ^ { \top } .\tag{18}
$$

⋆ Unified forward process. Eq. (18) has the same formulation as the transition matrix of the discretetime case in Eq. (8), if we set $\begin{array} { r } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } = \exp ( - \overline { { \beta } } _ { t | s } ) = \exp ( - \int _ { s } ^ { t } \beta ( a ) d a ) } \end{array}$ . Thus, this formulation unifies the forward processes of adding noise for both discrete- and continuous-time discrete diffusion. With lim $ _ { \cdot t  T } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } = 0$ , or equivalently lim $\begin{array} { r } { { \bf \Omega } _ { t  T } \int _ { 0 } ^ { T } \beta ( { a } ) d { a } = \infty } \end{array}$ , we achieve the goal $\overline { { Q } } _ { T \vert 0 } = \mathbf { 1 } m ^ { \top }$ . We use $\overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \vert \varepsilon }$ directly in the following sections, i.e. Eq. (8). To summarize, for the forward CTMC

$$
R _ { t } = \beta ( t ) ( { \bf 1 } m ^ { \top } - I ) , \mathrm { a n d } \quad \overline { { Q } } _ { t \mid s } = \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } I + ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } ) { \bf 1 } m ^ { \top } .\tag{19}
$$

We can further get vector-form forward rate

$$
r _ { t } ( \pmb { x } | \cdot ) = R _ { t } \pmb { x } = \beta ( t ) \big ( \langle \pmb { x } , m \rangle \pmb { 1 } - \pmb { x } \big ) , \quad r _ { t } ( \cdot | \pmb { x } \rangle = R _ { t } ^ { \top } \pmb { x } = \beta ( t ) \big ( m - \pmb { x } \big ) .\tag{20}
$$

Backward CTMC. To generate samples from the target distribution, we have to reverse the process of the forward CTMC. Let $\widehat { r } _ { t }$ be the transition rate of the backward CTMC with corresponding matrix $\widehat { R } _ { t }$ . When the forward and backward CTMCs are matched exactly, theoretically the forward and

backward CTMCs have the following relationship (see Campbell et al. [2022]’s Proposition 1):

$$
\widehat { r } _ { t } ( { \pmb x } | { \pmb y } ) = r _ { t } ( { \pmb y } | { \pmb x } ) \frac { q _ { t } ( { \pmb x } ) } { q _ { t } ( { \pmb y } ) } , \quad \forall { \pmb x } \neq { \pmb y } .\tag{21}
$$

However, the marginal distributions $q _ { t } ( \pmb { x } )$ and $q _ { t } ( \pmb { y } )$ are intractable analytically, hence we cannot derive the backward CTMC directly from Eq. (21). Instead, Campbell et al. [2022] parameterize the transition rate $\widehat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ , by observing that $\begin{array} { r } { \frac { q _ { t } ( \pmb { x } ) } { q _ { t } ( \pmb { y } ) } = \sum _ { \pmb { x } _ { 0 } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( \pmb { x } | \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( \pmb { y } | \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ) } q _ { 0 | t } ( \pmb { x } _ { 0 } | \pmb { y } ) ^ { 3 } } \end{array}$ , as follows

$$
\widehat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } | { \pmb y } ) = r _ { t } ( { \pmb y } | { \pmb x } ) \sum _ { { \pmb x } _ { 0 } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( { \pmb x } | { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( { \pmb y } | { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ) } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { 0 } | { \pmb y } ) .\tag{22}
$$

Then, $\widehat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ is learned with θ to minimize the continuous-time negative VLB introduced next.

Negative VLB. Similar to the discrete-time case, the backward CTMC can be learned by maximizing the VLB for data log-likelihood. Computing VLB for CTMC is nontrivial, and fortunately Campbell et al. [2022] has derived (see their Proposition 2) that the negative VLB can be formulated as

$$
T \mathbb { E } _ { t \sim \mathrm { U n i } ( 0 , T ) } \Big [ \sum _ { z \neq x } \hat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( z | x ) - \sum _ { z \neq x } r _ { t } ( z | x ) \log \hat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( x | z ) \Big ] .\tag{23}
$$

However, Campbell et al. [2022]’s original design did not simplify the negative VLB with the parameterization of $\widehat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ in Eq. (22), making the implementation nontrivial and inefficient. In this bsection, we show that their formulation can be greatly simplified to a closed-form evaluation.

To simplify Eq. (23), we introduce $g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \pmb { x } | \pmb { y } )$ such that $\begin{array} { r } { \widehat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } | { \pmb y } ) = r _ { t } ( { \pmb y } | { \pmb x } ) g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } | { \pmb y } ) } \end{array}$ , with

$$
g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } | { \pmb y } ) : = \sum _ { { \pmb x } _ { 0 } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( { \pmb x } | { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( { \pmb y } | { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ) } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { 0 } | { \pmb y } ) \approx \frac { q _ { t } ( { \pmb x } ) } { q _ { t } ( { \pmb y } ) } ,\tag{24}
$$

which is the estimator of the marginal probability ratio.

Proposition 3.1. The vector form parameterization of ${ \dot { \mathbf { \theta } } } _ { g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } | { \pmb y } ) }$ can be simplified analytically as:

$$
g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \cdot | y ) = \Big [ \big ( 1 - \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } \langle f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( y ) , y \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } + \big ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } \big ) \langle y , m \rangle } \big ) m + \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( y ) \Big ] \odot \frac { 1 - y } { \langle y , m \rangle } + y\tag{25}
$$

The proof is in Appx. §A.12, with its extension to multi-element $\partial _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \cdot | \pmb { y } ^ { 1 : D } )$ in Eq. (75).

## 3.3 Contrib. 4: Simplification of Continuous-time Negative VLB

As the derivation is much harder in multi-element case, we work on it directly and single-element can be induced as a special case. Given $\scriptstyle { \pmb { x } } ^ { 1 : D }$ , let ${ \pmb x } ^ { \backslash d }$ represent $\pmb { x } ^ { 1 : D \setminus d }$ , i.e. the object without d-th element. As we assume the forward processes are independent for different elements, $r _ { t } ^ { d }$ represents the transition rate of the forward CTMC process at the d-th element.

Proposition 3.2. The negative VLB in Eq. (23) in multi-element case can be simplified as

$$
T \mathbb { E } _ { \mathbf { \Phi } _ { \mathbf { x } ^ { \{ i : D \} } \sim \mathcal { A } _ { | \Phi | } ( | \mathbf { z } | ^ { i } , \mathbf { r } ) } } \left[ \sum _ { a = 1 } ^ { D } r _ { t } ^ { d } ( \mathbf { x } ^ { d } | \cdot ) ^ { \top } g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \cdot | \mathbf { x } ^ { 1 : D } ) - \frac { 1 } { M s _ { t } ( z ^ { 1 : D } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } ) } \sum _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } \frac { \mathbf { 1 } ^ { \top } [ q _ { t | 0 } ( \cdot | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) \odot r _ { t } ^ { d } ( z ^ { d } | \cdot ) \odot \log g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \cdot | z ^ { 1 : D } ) ] } { q _ { t | 0 } ( z ^ { d } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } \right]\tag{26}
$$

where $S _ { t } \big ( z ^ { 1 : D } | x ^ { 1 : D } \big )$ is any unnormalized distribution (see $E q .$ (82) in Appx.) of sampling the auxiliary variable $z ^ { 1 : D } f r o { \dot { m } } x ^ { 1 : D }$ . The auxiliary variable is introduced to avoid multiple passes of the model for computing the second term of Eq. (23). $M _ { S _ { t } }$ is a normalization scalar (see Eq. (86) in Appx.) that only depends on $S _ { t } , z ^ { 1 : D }$ , and $\mathbf { \Delta x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D }$

The detailed proof is in Appx. §A.14. This formulation simplifies and generalizes the result in Campbell et al. [2022], such that any $S _ { t }$ can be used for introducing the auxiliary variable $z _ { 1 : D }$ Importantly, Eq. (26) shows that changing $S _ { t }$ only affects a scalar weight. Computing the loss requires two passes of the model for $\boldsymbol { z } ^ { 1 : D }$ and $\mathbf { x } ^ { 1 : D ^ { \dagger } }$ separately. Now we show that it can be further simplified to only a single pass of the model.

Proposition 3.3. The loss in Eq. (26) can be further simplified as

$$
T \mathbb { E } _ { \mathbf { \Phi } _ { \mathbf { x } ^ { 1 : D } \sim q _ { t | 0 } ( \cdot | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { i ; \mathcal { D } } ) } } \Big [ \sum _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } r _ { t } ^ { d } ( \mathbf { x } ^ { d } | \cdot ) ^ { \top } \Big ( g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \cdot | \mathbf { x } ^ { 1 : D } ) - \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( \cdot | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) \odot \log g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \cdot | \mathbf { x } ^ { 1 : D } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( \mathbf { x } ^ { d } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } \Big ) \Big ]\tag{27}
$$

$$
\begin{array} { r } { ^ { 3 } \mathrm { A s } \ q _ { t } ( \pmb { x } ) = \sum _ { \pmb { x } _ { 0 } } q _ { t | 0 } ( \pmb { x } | \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ) q _ { \mathrm { d a t a } } ( \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ) \ \mathrm { a n d } \ q _ { t } ( \pmb { x } ) = \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( \pmb { x } | \tilde { \pmb { x } } _ { 0 } ) q _ { \mathrm { d a t a } } ( \tilde { \pmb { x } } _ { 0 } ) } { q _ { 0 | t } ( \tilde { \pmb { x } } _ { 0 } | \pmb { x } ) } . } \end{array}
$$

The detailed proof can be found in Appendix §A.15. Note that this loss requires only a single forward pass of the model, making it extremely efficient. Additionally, this loss aligns with the DWDSE loss (while presented in single-element case) in Lou et al. [2024], which is derived from the different concrete score matching direction. This indicates that the VLB is essentially the same as the ratio matching loss, as also demonstrated in the continuous-state setting, such that the score matching Song et al. [2021b] is shown to be equivalent to VLB computation in Ho et al. [2020a].

## 3.4 Contrib. 5: Fast Backward Sampling & Unification of Discrete Diffusion

Campbell et al. [2022] proposes to use the learned transition rate $\widehat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ of the backward CTMC to sample reversely for the target distribution $p _ { \mathrm { d a t a } } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ b However, different from the forward CTMC where all elements are sampled independently, the backward CTMC processes for all elements are coupled together and do not have the closed-form transition probability derived from the learned transition rate. Direct and exact sampling from a CTMC uses the algorithm by Gillespie [1977], which is intractable for multi-element objects. Campbell et al. [2022] proposes to use tau-leaping [Gillespie, 2001] that approximately samples all transitions from time t to $t - \tau$ , assuming $R _ { t } ^ { 1 : D }$ fixed during the time period. While being tractable, it introduces unknown errors that needs correction process.

We propose to avoid the costly sampling from using the transition rate of backward CTMC. We first observe that the estimated transition rate $\breve { \widehat { r } } _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ is essentially derived from the estimated $p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ . Hence using $\widehat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ is equivalent to using $p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ in an indirect way. We realize that the transition probability $q _ { s \mid t } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } \big )$ can be computed easily from $p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ directly, as shown in Eq. (10). With the help of Eq. (10), we can sample $\mathbf { x } _ { \mathrm { 0 } }$ or equivalently $\mathbf { x } _ { 0 | T }$ through sampling $\mathbf { x } _ { t _ { n - 1 } | t _ { n } } , . . . , \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { 1 } | t _ { 2 } } , \mathbf { x } _ { t _ { 0 } | t _ { 1 } }$ sequentially, with any $\{ t _ { i } \} _ { i = 0 } ^ { n }$ that satisfies $0 { = } t _ { 0 } < t _ { 1 } < . . . < t _ { n } { = } T$ . Although Eq. (10) is derived for discrete-time case, it applies directly in continuous-time case, thanks to the unification of the forward process for discrete- and continuous-time diffusion (§3.2). Hence, discrete-time and continuous-time diffusion also have the same unified backward generation process.

⋆ Unified Discrete Diffusion. All in all, through a series of mathematical simplifications, we have shown that both discrete&continuous-time discrete diffusion share (1) the same forward diffusion process; (2) the same parameterization for learning $p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } \mathbf { ; }$ and (3) the same backward denoising process. In light of our reformulations, we propose USD3, a novel Unified and Simplified Discrete Denoising Diffusion model. Notably, USD3 utilizes the same source code for both discrete- and continuous-time, up to a single alteration in the loss function during training, and a shared sample generation process (resp. Algo. 1 and 2 in Appx. §A.16).

## 4 Experiments

Discrete diffusion has limited , no established guidelines on model training. Many prior work optimize a combined VLB and cross-entropy (CE) loss with a fixed weight, without deeper investigation. In this work we not only improve VLB loss mathematically, but also empirically explore an extensive testbed of training regimes for discrete diffusion—including various loss combinations, both discreteand continuous-time training, as well as varying model sizes—toward a deeper understanding of which yield tractable optimization and higher generation quality. USD3 is a hybrid of our simplified exact VLB and CE, and USD3∗ refers to its approximation with further simplifications (§2.2.5 and §3.3). USD3-CE and USD3-VLB are variants, resp. with CE or VLB loss only.

Baselines. We compare USD3 and variants to three latest SOTA discrete diffusion models in the literature: D3PM in Austin et al. [2021], RDM in Zhang et al. [2023] (discrete-time), τ -LDR-0 in Campbell et al. [2022] , SDDM in Sun et al. [2023] and SEDD in Lou et al. [2024] (continuous time).

Training Details. Thanks to unification, we can evaluate both discrete- and continuous-time models with both cosine and constant noise schedulers at ease. In USD3, we combine VLB and CE with weight 0.001 for the latter, following prior literature. For USD3∗, we combine VLB with CE weight 1.0. As architecture, we parameterize $f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ with a sequence transformer model. By varying its depths and widths, we study the impact of model size. The details are described in Appx. §A.18.4.

## 4.1 Music Generation

Lakh Pianoroll Datasets. We evaluate monophonic music generation on PIANO, the cleaned Lakh pianoroll dataset [Raffel [2016], Dong et al. [2017]], containing 6, 000 training and 973 evaluation (or test) sequences of 256 notes each. Here we perform conditional generation; given the first 32 notes, the models are required to generate the rest 224 notes. Interestingly, we find that some (124) evaluation sequences share the same first 32 notes as one or more training sequences. Such repetition gives us a unique opportunity to investigate what-we-call “parroting”—the phenomenon that models are simply re-playing the exact training data during generation. To that end we create PIANO-P, a subset consisting only of these 124 evaluation sequences paired with their first-32-note-matching training sequences. Details are in Appx. §A.18.1.

Metrics. We use a number of new metrics for PIANO: 2- and 3-gram (1) Hellinger Distance (↓) and (2) Proportion of Outliers (↓), in addition to previously used 1-gram counterparts based only on single note appearances in Campbell et al. [2022]; (3) Diverse Edit Distance (↑), which accounts for the creativity/novelty across multiple generated samples. On PIANO-P, we also report (4) Train-to-Test Ratios (↑) for {1,2,3}-gram Hellinger as well as Proportion of Outliers, which compare the weighted distance of a generated sample to its matching training vs. test sequence that share the same first 32 notes. Such ratios quantify the extent of “parroting”; a smaller ratio indicates a higher (lower) degree of memorization (generalization). Calculation details of all metrics are given in Appx. §A.18.3.

Results. Table 1 shows that USD3 and its variants perform better than the baseline methods across metrics. An exception is D3PM’s Diverse Edit Distance, which trades-off high novelty with low generation quality. USD3-CE, while performing well w.r.t. 1-gram metrics, does not compete with USD3-VLB and USD3 w.r.t. {2,3}-gram metrics, which indicates that CE only loss captures the least sequential information. Models with combined losses, USD3 and USD3∗, achieve higher Train-to-Test ratio than pure CE or VLB based ones, suggesting that the combination of two losses can alleviate overfitting, i.e. “parroting” the training data. We find continuous-time USD3 to perform better than discrete-time counterparts models because its ability of denoising through any timestep.

Table 1: Conditional music gen. quality (3 samples avg.) on PIANO w.r.t. n-gram Hellinger, n-gram Prop. of Out., and Diverse Edit Dist. Also, Train-to-Test Ratio for on PIANO-P quantifies “parroting”. First & Second shown in color (Detailed version is in Table 4).
<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Method</td><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="3">n-gram Hellinger(↓)</td><td colspan="3">n-gram Prop.of Out.(↓)</td><td rowspan="2">Div. Edit Dist. (↑)</td><td rowspan="2">3g-Prop. Ratio(↑)</td></tr><tr><td>1gram</td><td>2gram</td><td>3gram</td><td>1gram</td><td>2gram</td><td>3gram</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Prreeeereeit</td><td>D3PM RDM</td><td>0.398 0.412</td><td>0.530 0.596</td><td>0.591 0.620</td><td>0.120 0.140</td><td>0.253 0.246</td><td>0.379 0.386</td><td>0.295 0.289</td><td>2.221 2.521</td></tr><tr><td>USD3-CE USD3-VLB USD3</td><td>0.375 0.379 0.377</td><td>0.483 0.464 0.469</td><td>0.574 0.542 0.552</td><td>0.107 0.117 0.107</td><td>0.209 0.184 0.186</td><td>0.303 0.273 0.286</td><td>0.047 0.082 0.064</td><td>2.888 2.863 3.083</td></tr><tr><td>USD3* SDDM T-LDR-0</td><td>0.375 0.375 0.379</td><td>0.470 0.485 0.481</td><td>0.555 0.577</td><td>0.110 0.110</td><td>0.191 0.205</td><td>0.283 0.340</td><td>0.066 0.060</td><td>2.959 2.901</td></tr><tr><td>con-snnnnnuti</td><td>SEDD USD3-CE USD3-VLB USD3 USD3*</td><td>0.381 0.373 0.376 0.374 0.374</td><td>0.471 0.483 0.462 0.462 0.462 0.549</td><td>0.571 0.547 0.577 0.549 0.543</td><td>0.114 0.105 0.116 0.120 0.112</td><td>0.207 0.182 0.222 0.186 0.184</td><td>0.320 0.271 0.346 0.295 0.270</td><td>0.050 0.061 0.043 0.061</td><td>2.965 3.042 2.637 2.904 3.083</td></tr></table>

Table 2: Image generation quality w.r.t. IS and FID over 50,000 unconditional generated CIFAR10 samples. First & Second shown in color.
<table><tr><td></td><td>Method</td><td>IS (↑)</td><td>FID (↓)</td></tr><tr><td>Drreiereeit</td><td>D3PM</td><td>8.13</td><td>18.08</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>RDM</td><td>7.16</td><td>24.23</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>USD3-CE</td><td>9.02</td><td>12.64</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>USD3*</td><td>9.27</td><td>12.07</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>USD3</td><td>8.85</td><td>13.25</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">ceniti</td><td>SDDM</td><td>8.72</td><td>14.17</td></tr><tr><td>T-LDR</td><td>8.37</td><td>17.61</td></tr><tr><td>SEDD</td><td>8.51</td><td>17.01</td></tr><tr><td>USD3-CE</td><td>9.23</td><td>11.97</td></tr><tr><td>USD3*</td><td>8.83</td><td>14.03</td></tr><tr><td>USD3</td><td>8.97</td><td>13.09</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">VQGAN Recons.</td><td>10.42</td><td>7.68</td></tr></table>

## 4.2 Image Generation

VQCIFAR10 Dataset. CIFAR10 contains 50, 000 training images in continuous values, which we convert to vectors from 64 × 512-dimensional quantization hash-code space with a pre-trained VQGAN Esser et al. [2020]. This conversion allows us to (1) evaluate our methods on nominal data by breaking the neighboring orders in the image space, and (2) select a closed-form stationary distribution m. Details on VQCIFAR10 dataset are given in Appx. §A.18.2.

Metrics. After feeding the generated samples through the VQGAN decoder to obtain representations from the discretized space, we measure the Inception Score (IS) (↑) and Frechet Inception Distance (FID) (↓) against the original CIFAR10 dataset. Note that our training set, which are discretized images from VQGAN, achieves IS=10.42 and FID=7.68, which are optimistic limits for generation.

Results. Table 2 shows that our proposed approaches outperform existing baselines. Discrete-time D3PM and RDM fall short for the harder image generation task, whereas our simplified discrete-time loss boosts quality significantly. In continuous-time, τ -LDR with a similar loss to USD3 falls short due to its complicated generation process, whereas SDDM is most competitive among the baselines, although requires substantial compute resources while being limited to a specialized model architecture. USD3-CE achieves competitive IS and FID scores, which validates our finding (recall Eq. (15)) that CE loss is essential for diffusion loss minimization.

Additional results. We provide memory and runtimes of models in Table 7 in Appx. §A.19.4, generated images in Fig.2 in Appx. §A.19.5, and ablations of MCMC sampling in Appx. §A.19.6.

## 5 Conclusion

We introduce two fundamental contributions for both discrete-time and continuous-time diffusion for categorical data. First, we presented extensive mathematical simplifications for the loss functions, including exact closed-form derivations as well as novel easy-to-optimize approximations. Second, we established a mathematical unification of discrete-time and continuous-time discrete diffusion, enabling mutual benefits. Our proposed approach USD3 for discrete diffusion achieved significant improvements on established datasets across a suite of generation quality metrics.

## References

William J Anderson. Continuous-time Markov chains: An applications-oriented approach. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.

Jacob Austin, Daniel D Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and Rianne van den Berg. Structured denoising diffusion models in discrete state-spaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:17981–17993, 2021.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Andrew Campbell, Joe Benton, Valentin De Bortoli, Thomas Rainforth, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. A continuous time framework for discrete denoising models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:28266–28279, 2022.

Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T. Freeman. Maskgit: Masked generative image transformer, 2022.

Ting Chen. On the importance of noise scheduling for diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10972, 2023.

Ahmet Demirkaya, Jiasi Chen, and Samet Oymak. Exploring the role of loss functions in multiclass classification. In 2020 54th annual conference on information sciences and systems (ciss), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2020.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.

Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.

Hao-Wen Dong, Wen-Yi Hsiao, Li-Chia Yang, and Yi-Hsuan Yang. Musegan: Multi-track sequential generative adversarial networks for symbolic music generation and accompaniment, 2017.

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Björn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image synthesis, 2020.

Daniel T Gillespie. Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions. The journal of physical chemistry, 81(25):2340–2361, 1977.

Daniel T Gillespie. Approximate accelerated stochastic simulation of chemically reacting systems. The Journal of chemical physics, 115(4):1716–1733, 2001.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020a.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020b.

Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik P Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David J Fleet, et al. Imagen video: High definition video generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303, 2022.

Emiel Hoogeboom, Didrik Nielsen, Priyank Jaini, Patrick Forré, and Max Welling. Argmax flows and multinomial diffusion: Learning categorical distributions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:12454–12465, 2021.

Aapo Hyvärinen. Some extensions of score matching. Computational statistics & data analysis, 51 (5):2499–2512, 2007.

Seokho Kang and Kyunghyun Cho. Conditional molecular design with deep generative models. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 59(1):43–52, 2018.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine. Elucidating the design space of diffusionbased generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:26565–26577, 2022.

Andrei Kolmogoroff. Über die analytischen methoden in der wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Mathematische Annalen, 104:415–458, 1931.

Xiang Li, John Thickstun, Ishaan Gulrajani, Percy S Liang, and Tatsunori B Hashimoto. Diffusion-lm improves controllable text generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35: 4328–4343, 2022.

Yibo Li, Jianfeng Pei, and Luhua Lai. Structure-based de novo drug design using 3d deep generative models. Chemical science, 12(41):13664–13675, 2021.

Aaron Lou, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Discrete diffusion modeling by estimating the ratios of the data distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16834, 2024.

Siwei Lyu. Interpretation and generalization of score matching. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 359–366, 2009.

OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2303.08774.

Colin Raffel. Learning-Based Methods for Comparing Sequences, with Applications to Audio-to-MIDI Alignment and Matching. PhD thesis, Columbia University, 2016.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical textconditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 1(2):3, 2022.

Andy Rindos, Steven Woolet, Ioannis Viniotis, and Kishor Trivedi. Exact methods for the transient analysis of nonhomogeneous continuous time markov chains. In Computations with Markov Chains: Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on the Numerical Solution of Markov Chains, pages 121–133. Springer, 1995.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a. URL https://openreview.net/ forum?id=St1giarCHLP.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id= PxTIG12RRHS.

Haoran Sun, Lijun Yu, Bo Dai, Dale Schuurmans, and Hanjun Dai. Score-based continuous-time discrete diffusion models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=BYWWwSY2G5s.

Ambuj Tewari and Peter L Bartlett. On the consistency of multiclass classification methods. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8(5), 2007.

Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learning, 2018.

Chenshuang Zhang, Chaoning Zhang, Mengchun Zhang, and In So Kweon. Text-to-image diffusion model in generative ai: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07909, 2023.

Lin Zheng, Jianbo Yuan, Lei Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. A reparameterized discrete diffusion model for text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05737, 2023.

## A Appendix

## A.1 Variational Lower Bound Derivation

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { \mathrm { ~ c o s s : ~ } \int \mathrm { e } ^ { \mathrm { i } \left( \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } - \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } \right) \mathrm { d } \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } } \left[ \mathrm { ~ c } ^ { 2 } \mathrm { ~ F i } _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } \times \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } } \left( \mathrm { ~ l o g } _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } } \left( \mathbf { x } _ { \perp } \right) \right) \mathrm { ~ d } \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } \mathrm { ~ d } \mathbf { k } _ { \parallel } ^ { 2 } \mathrm { ~ K } _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } \times \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } } \mathrm { ~ s } _ { \perp } \right] } \\ &  \quad - \mathrm { ~ B _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } \times \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } - \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } } \left[ \mathrm { ~ B _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } } \left( \mathbf { x } _ { \perp } \right) \cdot ~ \sum ~ } _ { i = 1 } ^ { 2 \mathcal { N } } \mathrm { ~ e } _ { i } ^ { \mathrm { ~ B _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } } \left( \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } \right) \cdot \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } } } \right] } \\ &  \quad - \mathrm { ~ R _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } \times \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } \times \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } } \left[ \mathrm { ~ c } ^ { 2 } \mathrm { ~ F i } _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } \times \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } } } \right] } \\ &  = \mathrm { ~ R _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } \times \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } \times \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } } \left[ \mathrm { ~ c } ^ { 2 } \mathrm { ~ F i } _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \mathbf { k } _ { \perp } \times \mathbf { r } _ { \perp } } } \right] } \\ &  \quad = \mathrm  ~ K _  \mathbf { k } _  \mathbf { k } _  \mathbf { k } _  \mathbf { k } _  \mathbf { k } _  \mathbf { k } _  \mathbf  k \end{array}\tag{28}
$$

<!-- image-->  
(a) Latent graphical model for diffusion

<!-- image-->  
(b) Generalize (a) to multi-element object  
Figure 1: The graphical model diagram for both element-wise diffusion and multi-element diffusion.

## A.2 Definition of nominal data

Nominal data, or categorical data, refers to data that can be categorized but not ranked or ordered. In mathematics, nominal data can be represented as a set of discrete categories or distinct labels without inherent ordering. As there is no ordering inside, operations of comparing categories is meaningless except checking equality. In the real world, most categories of data are nominal in nature, such as nationality, blood type, colors, among others.

## A.3 Derivation of $q ( x _ { t - 1 } | x _ { t } , x _ { 0 } )$

First, let us define $\overline { { Q } } _ { t \vert s } = Q _ { s + 1 } \hdots Q _ { t }$ . Note that $\overline { { Q } } _ { t \vert 0 } = \overline { { Q } } _ { t }$ and $\overline { { Q } } _ { t \mid t - 1 } = Q _ { t }$ . Accordingly, we can derive the following two equalities.

$$
\begin{array} { c } { q ( { \bf x } _ { t } | { \bf x } _ { s } ) = \mathrm { C a t } ( { \bf x } _ { t } ; \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _ { s } ) } \\ { q ( { \bf x } _ { s } | { \bf x } _ { t } , { \bf x } _ { 0 } ) = \frac { q ( { \bf x } _ { t } | { \bf x } _ { s } ) q ( { \bf x } _ { s } | { \bf x } _ { 0 } ) } { q ( { \bf x } _ { t } | { \bf x } _ { 0 } ) } = \frac { \mathrm { C a t } ( { \bf x } _ { t } ; \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _ { s } ) \mathrm { C a t } ( { \bf x } _ { s } ; \overline { { Q } } _ { s } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _ { 0 } ) } { \mathrm { C a t } ( { \bf x } _ { t } ; \overline { { Q } } _ { t } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _ { 0 } ) } } \\  = \frac { { \bf x } _ { s } ^ { \top } \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } { \bf x } _ { t } \cdot { \bf x } _ { s } ^ { \top } \overline { { Q } } _ { s } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _ { 0 } } { { \bf x } _ { t } ^ { \top } \overline { { Q } } _ { t } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _ { 0 } } = { \bf x } _ { s } ^ { \top } \frac { \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } { \bf x } _ { t } \odot \overline { { Q } } _ { s } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _ { 0 } } { { \bf x } _ { t } ^ { \top } \overline { { Q } } _ { t } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _ { 0 } } = \mathrm { C a t } ( { \bf x } _ { s } ; \frac { \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } { \bf x } _ { t } \odot \overline { { Q } } _ { s } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _ { 0 } }  { \bf x } _ { t } ^ { \top } \overline { { Q } } _ { t } ^ { \top } { \bf x } _  \end{array}\tag{29}
$$

(30)

Using the formulation of $Q _ { t }$ in $\operatorname { E q . } ( 7 ) , \overline { { Q } } _ { t \mid s }$ can be written as

$$
\overline { { Q } } _ { t \vert s } = \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \vert s } I + ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \vert s } ) \mathbf { 1 } m ^ { \top }\tag{31}
$$

where $\begin{array} { r } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \vert s } = \prod _ { i = s + 1 } ^ { t } \alpha _ { i } } \end{array}$ . Note that $\overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } = \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \vert s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s }$

Next, we can simplify Eq. (5) using the above formulations as

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { \frac { \overline { { Q } } _ { t \mid s } \mathbf { x } _ { t } \odot \overline { { Q } } _ { s } ^ { \top } \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } { \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { \top } \overline { { Q } } _ { t } ^ { \top } \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } = \frac { \left( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } \mathbf { x } _ { t } + \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } \right) / m , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \right) \mathbf { 1 } \big ) \odot \left( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } + \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } \right) m \right) } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \left. \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \right. + \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \right) \left. m , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \right. } } \\ & { ~ = \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \mathbf { x } _ { t } \odot \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } + \left( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \right) \left. m , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \right. \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } + \left( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \right) \mathbf { x } _ { t } \odot m + \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } \right) \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } \right) \left. m , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \right. m } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \left. \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } \right. + \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \right) \left. m , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \right. } } \end{array}\tag{32}
$$

We can simplify the above equation further by considering two cases: $( 1 ) { \bf x } _ { t } = { \bf x } _ { 0 }$ and $( 2 ) { \bf x } _ { t } \neq { \bf x } _ { 0 }$

(Case 1) When ${ \bf x } _ { t } = { \bf x } _ { 0 }$ , using the fact that both $\mathbf { x } _ { t }$ and $\mathbf { x } _ { \mathrm { 0 } }$ are one-hot encoded, we observe

$$
\begin{array} { r l r } { \mathrm { E q . } ( 3 2 ) = } & { \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } { \bf x } _ { t } + \left( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \right) \langle m , { \bf x } _ { t } \rangle { \bf x } _ { t } + \left( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \right) \langle m , { \bf x } _ { t } \rangle { \bf x } _ { t } + \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } \right) \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } \right) \langle m , { \bf x } _ { t } \rangle m } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } + \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \right) \langle m , { \bf x } _ { t } \rangle } } & \\ & { = } & { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } + \left( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } + \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } - 2 \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \right) \langle m , { \bf x } _ { t } \rangle } { \bf x } _ { t } + \frac { \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } \right) \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } \right) \langle m , { \bf x } _ { t } \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } + \left( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \right) \langle m , { \bf x } _ { t } \rangle } m  \\ & { } & { = \left( 1 - \lambda _ { t \mid s } \right) \cdot { \bf x } _ { t } + \lambda _ { t \mid s } \cdot m ~ , \qquad ( 3 3 ) } \end{array}
$$

where $\lambda _ { t \vert s }$ is defined as

$$
\lambda _ { t | s } = \frac { ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } ) ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) \langle m , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } + ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } ) \langle m , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \rangle } .\tag{34}
$$

(Case 2) When $\mathbf { x } _ { t } \neq \mathbf { x } _ { 0 }$ , we can similarly derive

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { \displaystyle \mathrm { E q . } ( 3 2 ) = \frac { ( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } )  m , { \bf x } _ { t }  { \bf x } _ { 0 } + ( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t  s } - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } )  m , { \bf x } _ { t }  { \bf x } _ { t } + ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } ) ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t  s } )  m , { \bf x } _ { t }  m } \ ~ } } \\ { { \displaystyle ~ \ ~ \ = \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } } { \bf x } _ { 0 } + \frac { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t  s } { \bf x } _ { t } + \frac { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } } ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t  s } ) m \ ~ } } \\ { { \displaystyle ~ \ = ( 1 - \mu _ { t  s } ) \cdot { \bf x } _ { 0 } + \mu _ { t  s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t  s } \cdot { \bf x } _ { t } + \mu _ { t  s } ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t  s } ) \cdot m } \ , }  \end{array}\tag{35}
$$

where $\mu _ { t | s }$ is defined as

$$
\mu _ { t | s } = \frac { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } }\tag{36}
$$

Combining the results from both cases together, we can write $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ in the following form.

$$
q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { \mathrm { C a t } \Big ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ; ( 1 - \lambda _ { t | s } ) \cdot \mathbf { x } _ { t } + \lambda _ { t | s } \cdot m \Big ) } & { \mathrm { w h e n ~ } \mathbf { x } _ { t } = \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } \\ { \mathrm { C a t } \Big ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ; ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) \cdot \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } + \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } \cdot \mathbf { x } _ { t } + \mu _ { t | s } ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) \cdot m \Big ) } & { \mathrm { w h e n ~ } \mathbf { x } _ { t } \not = \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } \end{array} \right.\tag{37}
$$

## A.4 Parameterization of $p _ { \theta } ( x _ { s } | x _ { t } )$

We first provide the formulation as follows.

$$
p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = \sum _ { \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } } q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )\tag{38}
$$

Using $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ in Eq. (9) and $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = \mathbf { C a t } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ; f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) )$ , we can expand it as

$$
\begin{array} { r l }  \iota _ { 1 } ( \mathbf { k } ) \mathbf { k } | \mathbf { k } | \mathbf { k } | \mathbf { k } | \mathbf { k } | \partial _ { 2 } = \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf { k } \mathbf { k } \cdot \mathbf  k \end{array}\tag{39}
$$

## A.5 Proof of Proposition 3

As $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ has two different categorical distributions based on whether $\mathbf { x } _ { t }$ is equal to $\mathbf { x } _ { \mathrm { 0 } }$ , we prove the Proposition 3 based on two cases.

Case 1: ${ \bf x } _ { t } = { \bf x } _ { 0 }$ . In this case, let $h _ { t } ^ { \theta } : = f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { t } ) - { \pmb x } _ { 0 }$ , now replace $f _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ with $g _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ in Eq. (2.2) and Eq. (10), we get

$$
\gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta } = ( \mu _ { t | s } - \lambda _ { t | s } - \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) \langle h _ { t } ^ { \theta } + x _ { 0 } , x _ { t } \rangle = ( \mu _ { t | s } - \lambda _ { t | s } - \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) \langle h _ { t } ^ { \theta } , x _ { t } \rangle + ( \mu _ { t | s } - \lambda _ { t | s } - \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) \langle h _ { t } ^ { \theta } , x _ { t } \rangle\tag{40}
$$

Taking the formulation into Eq. (10) and cancel out terms, we can simplify $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ as

$$
\begin{array} { r l r } { p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) h _ { t } ^ { \theta } + ( 1 - \lambda _ { t | s } ) \mathbf { x } _ { t } + \lambda _ { t | s } m + ( \mu _ { t | s } - \lambda _ { t | s } - \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) \langle h _ { t } ^ { \theta } , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \rangle ( x _ { t } - m ) } & \\ { = q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) + ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) \Big [ h _ { t } ^ { \theta } + \frac { \mu _ { t | s } - \lambda _ { t | s } - \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } } { 1 - \mu _ { t | s } } \langle h _ { t } ^ { \theta } , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \rangle ( x _ { t } - m ) \Big ] } & \\ { = q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) + ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) \Big [ h _ { t } ^ { \theta } + \phi _ { t | s } \langle h _ { t } ^ { \theta } , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \rangle ( x _ { t } - m ) \Big ] } & { ( 4 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) \Big [ h _ { t } ^ { \theta } + \phi _ { t | s } \langle h _ { t } ^ { \theta } , \mathbf { x } _ { t } \rangle ( x _ { t } - m ) \Big ] } & \end{array}
$$

Case 2: $\mathbf { x } _ { t } \neq \mathbf { x } _ { 0 }$ . Based on Eq. (9) and Eq. (10), it’s easy to find that

$$
\begin{array} { r l r } {  { p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) = ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) ( f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { t } ) - { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ) + \gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { t } - { \pmb m } ) + ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) { \pmb x } _ { 0 } + \mu _ { t | s } { \bar { \alpha } } _ { t | s } { \pmb x } _ { t } + \mu _ { t | s } ( 1 - { \bar { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) { \pmb m } } } \\ & { } & { = ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) ( f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { t } ) - { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ) + \gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { t } - { \pmb m } ) + q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \\ & { } & { = q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) + ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) \Big [ f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { t } ) - \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } + \frac { \gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta } } { ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } ) } ( { \pmb x } _ { t } - { \pmb m } ) \Big ] \qquad ( 4 2 ) } \end{array}
$$

Taking the definition of $\gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta }$ in Eq. (2.2) and using the fact $< \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } , \mathbf { x } _ { t } > = 0$ we get the formulation in proposition 3.

For both cases, we proved that the formulation in proposition 3 is correct.

## A.6 Proof of KL divergence approximation

Assume that $p ( { \pmb x } ) = q ( { \pmb x } ) + \triangle p ( { \pmb x } )$ , and both $p ( { \pmb x } )$ and $q ( { \pmb x } )$ are valid categorical distributions. Then

$$
D _ { \mathrm { K L } } \big ( q ( \pmb { x } ) \| p ( \pmb { x } ) \big ) = - \sum _ { \pmb { x } } q ( \pmb { x } ) \log \frac { p ( \pmb { x } ) } { q ( \pmb { x } ) } = - \sum _ { \pmb { x } } q ( \pmb { x } ) \log ( 1 + \frac { \triangle p ( \pmb { x } ) } { q ( \pmb { x } ) } )\tag{43}
$$

By Taylor expansion, $\textstyle \log ( 1 + x ) \approx x - { \frac { x ^ { 2 } } { 2 } }$ , we ignore larger than 2 order terms. Then apply this we get

$$
\begin{array} { l } { { \displaystyle D _ { \mathrm { K L } } \big ( q ( { \pmb x } ) \| p ( { \pmb x } ) \big ) = - \sum _ { { \pmb x } } q ( { \pmb x } ) [ \frac { \triangle p ( { \pmb x } ) } { q ( { \pmb x } ) } - ( \frac { \triangle p ( { \pmb x } ) } { q ( { \pmb x } ) } ) ^ { 2 } ] } } \\ { ~ = - \sum _ { { \pmb x } } \triangle p ( { \pmb x } ) + \sum _ { { \pmb x } } \frac { \triangle p ( { \pmb x } ) ^ { 2 } } { q ( { \pmb x } ) } } \\ { ~ = \sum _ { { \pmb x } } \frac { \triangle p ( { \pmb x } ) ^ { 2 } } { q ( { \pmb x } ) } } \end{array}\tag{44}
$$

Change probabilities q and p to $q _ { ( } \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ and $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ we get the targeted formulation.

## A.7 VLB with partial time steps

Assume that we only observe $\mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { s }$ , and $\mathbf { x } _ { 0 } .$ , and assume that we have learned the prior $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { \log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = \log \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \frac { p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { s } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \geq \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \log \frac { p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { s } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } } \\ & { \qquad = \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } [ \log \frac { p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } | \mathbf { x } _ { s } ) } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } ] } \\ & { \qquad = \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \Big [ \log \frac { p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } + \log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) + \log \frac { p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) } { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) } \Big ] } \\ &  \qquad = - D _ { \mathrm { K L } } [ q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf  \end{array}\tag{45}
$$

## A.8 Reparameterization Form for Sampling

In practice, we need to sample $\mathbf { x } _ { t \mid 0 } \sim q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ for training and $\mathbf { x } _ { s \mid t } \sim p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ for generation (backward denoising). In what follows, we provide the reparameterization form for these to facilitate fast sampling. Given $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) = \mathrm { C a t } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ; \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } + ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } ) m )$ and $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ as in Eq. (10), we can rewrite the corresponding variables as

$$
\mathbf { x } _ { t \mid 0 } = \delta _ { 1 , \mathbf { b } _ { t } } \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } + ( 1 - \delta _ { 1 , \mathbf { b } _ { t } } ) \mathbf { m } _ { 0 } , { \mathrm { ~ w h e r e ~ } } \mathbf { b } _ { t } \sim \mathrm { B e r n o u l l i } ( { \overline { { \alpha } } } _ { t } )\tag{46}
$$

$$
{ \bf x } _ { s \mid t } = \delta _ { 1 , { \bf b } _ { s \mid t } } \tilde { \bf x } _ { 0 \mid t } + \delta _ { 2 , { \bf b } _ { s \mid t } } { \bf x } _ { t } + \delta _ { 3 , { \bf b } _ { s \mid t } } { \bf m } _ { 0 } ,\tag{47}
$$

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \mathrm { w h e r e ~ } \tilde { \mathbf { x } } _ { 0 \mid t } \sim \mathbf { C a t } ( f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ) ) \mathrm { ~ a n d ~ } \mathbf { b } _ { s \mid t } \sim \mathbf { C a t } ( \cdot ; [ 1 - \mu _ { t \mid s } , \mu _ { t \mid s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } + \gamma _ { t \mid s } ^ { \theta } , ~ \mu _ { t \mid s } ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } ) - \gamma _ { t \mid s } ^ { \theta } ] ) . } \end{array}
$$

Eq. (46) and Eq. (47) essentially show that the sampling process can be divided into two steps: first, sample the branch indicator $\mathbf { b } _ { t } \left( \operatorname { o r } \mathbf { b } _ { s \mid t } \right)$ , and then sample from the categorical distribution of that branch, i.e. $\mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { m } _ { 0 } , \mathrm { o r } \tilde { \mathbf { x } } _ { 0 \mid t }$ . Moreover, the three terms in Eq. (47) highlight that the denoising step of generating xs from xt essentially draws samples via three levers: (1) use the predicted sample $\mathbf { x } _ { \mathrm { 0 } }$ from the trained network $f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ directly, (2) keep it unchanged as $\mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathrm { o r } \left( 3 \right)$ roll it back to noise m0, offering an intuitive understanding.

## A.9 Discrete-Time Multi-element Object Extension

We first extend $q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ) , q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } )$ , and $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } )$ to multi-element object, and then present the negative VLB loss extension. First, for the forward process conditional on $\mathbf { x } _ { 0 } .$ , each element $\mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d }$ of the multi-element object $\mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D }$ has its own diffusion process without interactions with others. Formally,

$$
q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : \mathcal { D } } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } ) = \prod _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) \quad \mathrm { , a n d } \quad q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ^ { 1 : D } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } ) = \prod _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } q ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ^ { d } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) \ .\tag{48}
$$

The corresponding forward reparameterization form for generating $\mathbf { x } _ { t \mid 0 } ^ { 1 : D }$ can be updated as

$$
\mathbf { x } _ { t | 0 } ^ { 1 : D } = \delta _ { 1 , \mathbf { b } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } } ^ { 1 : D } \odot \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } + \left( 1 - \delta _ { 1 , \mathbf { b } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } } ^ { 1 : D } \right) \odot \mathbf { m } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } \quad ,\tag{49}
$$

where $\delta _ { 1 , \mathbf { b } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } } ^ { 1 : D }$ is a D-dimensional vector with d-th element being $\delta _ { 1 , \mathbf { b } _ { + } ^ { d } }$ and $\mathbf { b } _ { t } ^ { d } \sim \mathbf { B e r n o u l l i } ( \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } )$

For the backward process, all elements’ transition processes are coupled together, as shown in the graphical model in Appx. Fig. 1(b). We start with the parameterization $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } )$ , with the form

$$
p _ { \theta } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } \big | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } \big ) = \prod _ { d = 1 } ^ { L } p _ { \theta } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } \big | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } \big ) \quad \mathrm { w i t h } \quad p _ { \theta } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } \big | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } \big ) = \mathbf { C a t } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } \big | f _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } \big ) \big )\tag{50}
$$

Then, $\begin{array} { r } { p _ { \theta } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ^ { 1 : D } \big | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } \big ) = \prod _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } p _ { \theta } \big ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ^ { d } \big | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } \big ) } \end{array}$ , with the component $p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ^ { d } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } )$ has the form

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \mathrm { C a t } \Big ( \mathbf { x } _ { s } ^ { d } ; ~ ( 1 - \mu _ { t \mid s } ) f _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ) + ( \mu _ { t \mid s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } + \gamma _ { t \mid s } ^ { \theta , d } ) \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } + \left( \mu _ { t \mid s } ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t \mid s } ) - \gamma _ { t \mid s } ^ { \theta , d } \right) m ^ { d } \Big ) \thinspace , } \end{array}\tag{51}
$$

$$
\mathrm { w h e r e ~ } \gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta , d } = \big ( \mu _ { t | s } - \lambda _ { t | s } ^ { d } - \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } \big ) \langle f _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ) , \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } \rangle , \ \lambda _ { t | s } ^ { d } = \frac { \big ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { s } \big ) \big ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } \big ) \langle m ^ { d } , \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } + \big ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t } \big ) \langle m ^ { d } , \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } \rangle }
$$

Similarly, the reparameterization form can be expressed as

$$
{ \bf x } _ { s \vert t } ^ { 1 : D } = \delta _ { 1 , { \bf b } _ { s \vert t } ^ { 1 : D } } ^ { 1 : D } \odot \tilde { { \bf x } } _ { 0 \vert t } ^ { 1 : D } ~ + ~ \delta _ { 2 , { \bf b } _ { s \vert t } ^ { 1 : D } } ^ { 1 : D } \odot { \bf x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ~ + ~ \delta _ { 3 , { \bf b } _ { s \vert t } ^ { 1 : D } } ^ { 1 : D } \odot { \bf m } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } ~ ,\tag{52}
$$

where $\tilde { \mathbf { x } } _ { 0 | t } ^ { d } \sim \mathbf { C a t } ( f _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ) )$ and $\mathbf { b } _ { s | t } ^ { d } \sim \operatorname { C a t } ( 1 - \mu _ { t | s } , \mu _ { t | s } \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } + \gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta , d } , \mu _ { t | s } ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | s } ) - \gamma _ { t | s } ^ { \theta , d } ) .$

Finally, the following reformulate the loss functions $\mathcal { L } _ { t } ( \boldsymbol { \theta } )$ for multi-element objects, where we drop the constant term for simplicity.

$$
\begin{array} { r l } & { \mathcal { L } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ( \theta ) = \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } | \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } ) } \displaystyle \sum _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } \bigg [ \delta _ { \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } } \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } ^ { d } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } = \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } [ - \log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } ^ { d } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ) ] + } \\ & { \qquad ( 1 - \delta _ { \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } , \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } } ) \mathbb { E } _ { q ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } ^ { d } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { d } \ne \mathbf { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } [ - \log p _ { \theta } ( \mathbf { x } _ { t - 1 } ^ { d } | \mathbf { x } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ) ] \bigg ] } \end{array}\tag{53}
$$

## A.10 CTMC introduction

The CTMC process can go with either increasing t or decreasing t, and we use increasing t as the default direction to introduce CTMC. For any CTMC, its transition rate matrix $R _ { t }$ with $[ R _ { t } ] _ { i j } = r _ { t } ( e _ { j } | e _ { i } )$ fully determines the underlying stochastic process. CTMC is categorized into time-homogeneous and time-inhomogeneous based on whether $R _ { t }$ is static with respect to t. In this paper we work with time-inhomogeneous CTMC.

Based on the definition in Eq. (17), we can derive some properties as follows

$$
\forall x , r _ { t } ( x | x ) \leq 0 ; \qquad \forall y \neq x , r _ { t } ( y | x ) \geq 0 ; \qquad \forall x , \sum _ { y } r _ { t } ( y | x ) = 0\tag{54}
$$

$$
q _ { t | t - \triangle t } ( \pmb { y } | \pmb { x } ) = \delta _ { \pmb { x } , \pmb { y } } + r _ { t } ( \pmb { y } | \pmb { x } ) \triangle t + o ( \triangle t )\tag{55}
$$

Eq. (54) shows the properties of transition rate, which imply $\begin{array} { r } { r _ { t } ( { \pmb x } | { \pmb x } ) = - \sum _ { { \pmb y } \neq { \pmb x } } r _ { t } ( { \pmb y } | { \pmb x } ) } \end{array}$ . Eq. (55) characterizes the infinitesimal change of transition probability, and can be used to derive the relationship between transition matrix $\overline { { Q } } _ { t \vert s }$ and transition rate matrix $R _ { t }$ . Formally, a CTMC’s transition probabilities satisfies the Kolmogorov forward and backward equations [Kolmogoroff, 1931] :

$$
\frac { d } { d t } q _ { t | s } ( y | x ) = \sum _ { \bf z } q _ { t | s } ( z | x ) r _ { t } ( y | z ) \quad \mathrm { o r } \quad \frac { d } { d t } \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } = \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } R _ { t } \qquad \mathrm { K o l m o g o r o v ~ F o r w a r d } \quad ( 5 6 ) \in \Omega _ { \bf z } \qquad 
$$

$$
\frac { d } { d s } q _ { t | s } ( y | x ) = - \sum _ { z } r _ { s } ( z | x ) q _ { t | s } ( y | z ) \quad \mathrm { o r } \quad \frac { d } { d s } \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } = - R _ { s } \overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } \quad \mathrm { K o l m o g o r o v ~ B a c k w a r d } \quad .\tag{57}
$$

The above equations are Ordinary Different Equations (ODEs) and have unique solutions. Rindos et al. [1995] mentioned that when $R _ { t }$ and $R _ { t \mathrm { : } }$ commute (i.e. $R _ { t _ { 1 } } R _ { t _ { 2 } } = R _ { t _ { 2 } } \bar { R } _ { t _ { 1 } } )$ ) for any $t _ { 1 } , t _ { 2 }$ , the transition probability matrix can be written as

$$
\overline { { Q } } _ { t \vert s } = \exp \Big ( \int _ { s } ^ { t } R _ { a } d a \Big )\tag{58}
$$

where $\begin{array} { r } { \exp ( M ) : = \sum _ { k = 0 } ^ { \infty } \frac { M ^ { k } } { k ! } } \end{array}$ is the matrix exponential operation. The commutative property of $R _ { t }$ can be achieved by choosing $R _ { t } = \beta ( t ) R _ { b }$ where $R _ { b } \in \mathbb { R } ^ { K \times K }$ is a time-independent base transition rate matrix satisfying properties in Eq. (54) and $\beta ( t )$ is a positive scalar dependent on time. Now assume $R _ { b }$ is diagonalizable and $R _ { b } \stackrel { \cdot } { = } U \Sigma U ^ { - \mathrm { i } }$ by eigen-decomposition, then we can simplify Eq. (58) as

$$
\overline { { Q } } _ { t | s } = \exp \Big ( \int _ { s } ^ { t } \beta ( t ) R _ { b } d a \Big ) = \exp ( \overline { { \beta } } _ { t | s } R _ { b } ) = \exp ( \overline { { \beta } } _ { t | s } U \Sigma U ^ { - 1 } ) = U \exp ( \overline { { \beta } } _ { t | s } \Sigma ) U ^ { - 1 }\tag{59}
$$

where $\textstyle { \overline { { \beta } } } _ { t \mid s } : = \int _ { s } ^ { t } { \beta ( a ) d a }$

## A.11 Derivation of Eq. (18)

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \overline { { Q } } _ { t \vert s } = \exp ( \overline { { \beta } } _ { t \vert s } R _ { b } ) = I + \displaystyle \sum _ { k = 1 } ^ { \infty } \frac { ( - \overline { { \beta } } _ { t \vert s } ) ^ { k } ( - R _ { b } ) ^ { k } } { k ! } = I - ( \displaystyle \sum _ { k = 1 } ^ { \infty } \frac { ( - \overline { { \beta } } _ { t \vert s } ) ^ { k } } { k ! } ) R _ { b } } \\ { = I - ( e ^ { - \overline { { \beta } } _ { t \vert s } } - 1 ) R _ { b } = e ^ { - \overline { { \beta } } _ { t \vert s } } I + ( 1 - e ^ { - \overline { { \beta } } _ { t \vert s } } ) \mathbf { 1 } m ^ { \top } } \end{array}\tag{60}
$$

## A.12 Derivation of Eq. (25)

With the help of Eq. (19), we first show that $g _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ can be simplified as follows.

$$
\begin{array} { l } { \displaystyle g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( z | x ) = \frac { 1 } { \langle x , m \rangle } \Big [ \langle z , m \rangle + \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( z | x ) - \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } \langle z , m \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } + \big ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } \big ) \langle x , m \rangle } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( x | x ) \Big ] } \\ { \displaystyle \qquad = \frac { 1 } { \langle x , m \rangle } \Big [ \big ( 1 - \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( x | x ) } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } + \big ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } \big ) \langle x , m \rangle } \big ) \langle z , m \rangle + \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( z | x ) \Big ] \quad \forall z \neq x } \end{array}\tag{61}
$$

Proof.

$$
\frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( z | \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( \pmb { x } | \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ) } = \frac { z ^ { \top } \overline { { Q } } _ { t | 0 } ^ { \top } \pmb { x } _ { 0 } } { \pmb { x } ^ { \top } \overline { { Q } } _ { t | 0 } ^ { \top } \pmb { x } _ { 0 } } = \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } z ^ { \top } \pmb { x } _ { 0 } + ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } ) \langle z , m \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } \pmb { x } ^ { \top } \pmb { x } _ { 0 } + ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } ) \langle \pmb { x } , m \rangle }\tag{62}
$$

Then when $z \neq x ,$ , we can write it as

$$
\frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( z | \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( \pmb { x } | \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ) } = \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { \frac { \langle z , m \rangle } { \langle \pmb { x } , m \rangle } } & { \quad \mathrm { i f } ~ \pmb { x } _ { 0 } \neq \pmb { x } \mathrm { ~ a n d } \pmb { x } _ { 0 } \neq z } \\ { \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } + \langle z , m \rangle } & { \quad \mathrm { i f } ~ \pmb { x } _ { 0 } = z } \\ { \frac { \langle z , m \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } } & { \quad \mathrm { i f } ~ \pmb { x } _ { 0 } = \pmb { x } } \end{array} \right.\tag{63}
$$

Hence,

$$
\begin{array} { l l } { \displaystyle g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( z | x ) = \sum _ { \alpha _ { 0 } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( z | x _ { 0 } ) } { \alpha _ { 0 } } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( x _ { 0 } | x ) } \\ { \displaystyle = \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( z | x ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( x | x ) } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( x | x ) + \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( z | z ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( x | z ) } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( z | x ) + \sum _ { \alpha _ { 0 } \neq z , \alpha _ { 0 } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( z | x _ { 0 } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( x | x _ { 0 } ) } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( x _ { 0 } | x ) } \\ { \displaystyle = \frac { \langle z , m \rangle } { \frac { \alpha _ { t | 0 } } { 1 - \alpha _ { t | 0 } } + \langle x , m \rangle } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( x | x ) + \frac { \frac { \alpha _ { t | 0 } } { 1 - \alpha _ { t | 0 } } + \langle z , m \rangle } { \langle x , m \rangle } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( z | x ) + \frac { \langle z , m \rangle } { \langle x , m \rangle } ( 1 - p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( z | x ) - p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( x | x ) ) } \\ { \displaystyle = \frac { 1 } { \langle x , m \rangle } \left[ ( 1 - \frac { \alpha _ { t | 0 } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( x | x ) } { \alpha _ { t | 0 } + ( 1 - \alpha _ { t | 0 } ) \langle x , m \rangle } ) \langle z , m \rangle + \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } { 1 - \alpha _ { t | 0 } } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( z | x ) \right] } & { \forall z \neq x } \end{array}
$$

Additionally, when $\begin{array} { r } { z = \pmb { x } , g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( z | \pmb { x } ) = \sum _ { \pmb { x } _ { 0 } } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( \pmb { x } _ { 0 } | \pmb { x } ) = 1 . } \end{array}$

We can also compute the vectorization $g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \cdot | x )$ directly as

$$
g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \cdot | x ) = \frac { 1 } { \langle x , m \rangle } \Big [ \big ( 1 - \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } \langle f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( x ) , x \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } + \big ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } \big ) \langle x , m \rangle } \big ) m + \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( x ) \Big ] \odot ( 1 - x ) + x\tag{65}
$$

where $f _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } )$ is the parameterized neural network for $p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( \cdot | x )$ that outputs the distribution of $\mathbf { x } _ { 0 \mid t }$ Eq. (25) combines Eq. (61) and $g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( \pmb { x } | \pmb { x } ) = 1 , \forall \pmb { x }$

## A.13 Derivation of Forward and Backward Transition Rate in Multi-element Case

In this section, we show how to extend transition rates, and and the ratio $g _ { t } ^ { \theta }$ , into multi-element case.   
We let ${ \pmb x } ^ { \backslash d }$ represent $\scriptstyle \mathbf { x } ^ { 1 : D \setminus d }$ , i.e. the object without d-th element, for simplicity.

Forward Transition Rates: First, the transition rates for forward sampling has a specific decomposition formulation in multi-element case as proven by Campbell et al. [2022], thus, we summarize the result as follows. The key assumption for CTMC is that at a single time, only one dimension can change.

$$
r _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ( { \pmb y } ^ { 1 : D } | { \pmb x } ^ { 1 : D } ) = \sum _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } r _ { t } ^ { d } ( { \pmb y } ^ { d } | { \pmb x } ^ { d } ) \delta _ { { \pmb x } ^ { \backslash d } , { \pmb y } ^ { \backslash d } }\tag{66}
$$

where $\delta _ { \pmb { x } \backslash d , \pmb { y } \backslash d }$ is the Kronecker delta and it is 1 if and only if $\pmb { x } ^ { \backslash d } = \pmb { y } ^ { \backslash d }$ . As we also assume that all dimension processes are indepedent, $r _ { t } ^ { d }$ denotes the transition rate of the CTMC process at d-th element/dimension.

Backward Transition Rates: Now let us work on $\hat { r } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ( \pmb { y } ^ { 1 : D } | \pmb { x } ^ { 1 : D } )$ . Notice that as the backward process is also a CTMC, it also satisfies that only one dimension can change at a time. We summarize two equivalent formulations as follows.

$$
\hat { r } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ( y ^ { 1 : D } | x ^ { 1 : D } ) = \sum _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } r _ { t } ^ { d } ( x ^ { d } | y ^ { d } ) \delta _ { x ^ { \vee } , y ^ { \vee } } \sum _ { x _ { 0 } ^ { d } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( y ^ { d } | x _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( x ^ { d } | x _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } q _ { 0 | t } ( x _ { 0 } ^ { d } | x ^ { 1 : D } )\tag{67}
$$

$$
\hat { r } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ( \pmb { y } ^ { 1 : D } | \pmb { x } ^ { 1 : D } ) = \sum _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } \frac { r _ { t } ^ { d } ( \pmb { x } ^ { d } | \pmb { y } ^ { d } ) \delta _ { \pmb { x } ^ { \setminus d } , \pmb { y } ^ { \setminus d } } } { \sum _ { \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( \pmb { x } ^ { d } | \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( \pmb { y } ^ { d } | \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } q _ { 0 | t } ( \pmb { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } | \pmb { y } ^ { 1 : D } ) }\tag{68}
$$

Notice that these two formulations should be equivalent. In practice, we use the first formulation to parameterize the reverse transition rate in learning.

Proof.

$$
{ \frac { q _ { t } ( y ^ { 1 : D } ) } { q _ { t } ( x ^ { 1 : D } ) } } = \sum _ { x _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } } { \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( y ^ { 1 : D } | x _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( x ^ { 1 : D } | x _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } ) } } q _ { 0 | t } ( x _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } | x ^ { 1 : D } ) = \sum _ { x _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } } q _ { 0 | t } ( x _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } | x ^ { 1 : D } ) \prod _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } { \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( y ^ { d } | x _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( x ^ { d } | x _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) } }\tag{69}
$$

$$
\sum _ { \boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } ^ { \smash { \scriptstyle d } } } q _ { 0 \mid t } ( x _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } | \boldsymbol { x } ^ { 1 : D } ) = \sum _ { \boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } ^ { \smash { \scriptstyle d } } } q _ { 0 \mid t } ( \boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } | \boldsymbol { x } ^ { 1 : D } ) q _ { 0 \mid t } ( \boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } ^ { \smash { \scriptstyle \mathsf { X } ^ { d } } } | \boldsymbol { x } ^ { 1 : D } , \boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } ) = q _ { 0 \mid t } ( \boldsymbol { x } _ { 0 } ^ { d } | \boldsymbol { x } ^ { 1 : D } )\tag{70}
$$

(Case 1)

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { \bar { r } _ { \varepsilon } ^ { 1 , D } ( \mathfrak { F } ^ { \mathrm { A D } } | v ^ { 1 , D } ) = r _ { \varepsilon } ^ { 1 , D } ( x ^ { 1 , D } | y ^ { 1 , D } ) \frac { q _ { \varepsilon } ( y ^ { 1 , D } ) } { q _ { \varepsilon } ( x ^ { 1 , D } ) } } & { } \\ & { = \Big ( \displaystyle \sum _ { j = 1 } ^ { D } r _ { \varepsilon } ^ { * } ( x ^ { 1 } | y ^ { 1 , D } ) \delta _ { x ^ { * } } \alpha _ { y ^ { * } } \Big ) \Big ( \displaystyle \sum _ { x _ { \varepsilon } ^ { 1 , D } } q _ { \varepsilon } ( x ^ { 1 , D } | x ^ { 1 , D } ) \prod _ { j = 1 } ^ { D } \frac { q _ { \varepsilon } ( 0 | \mathfrak { F } ^ { d } | \alpha _ { \varepsilon } ^ { d } ) } { q _ { \varepsilon } ( 1 | x ^ { 1 , D } ) } \Big ) } \\ & { = \displaystyle \sum _ { j = 1 } ^ { D } \sum _ { r _ { \varepsilon } ^ { * } ( x ^ { 1 } ) } r _ { \varepsilon } ^ { * } ( x ^ { 1 } | y ^ { d } ) \delta _ { x ^ { * } , x ^ { * } , y ^ { * , M } | 0 | \mathfrak { F } } ( \quad | x ^ { 1 , D } ) \frac { q _ { \varepsilon } ( y ^ { 1 } ) } { q _ { \varepsilon } ( 1 | x ^ { 1 } | ) } } \\ &  = \displaystyle \sum _ { j = 1 } ^ { D } \sum _ { r _ { \varepsilon } ^ { * } ( x ^ { 1 } | y ^ { d } ) \delta _ { x ^ { * } , x ^ { * } , y ^ { * , M } ) } = \displaystyle \sum _ { q _ { \varepsilon } ^ { 1 } ( | x ^ { 1 } | ) } \frac { q _ { \varepsilon } ( y ^ { 1 } ) } { q _ { \varepsilon } ( 1 | x ^ { 1 } | ) } } \\ &  = \displaystyle \sum _ { j = 1 } ^ { D } r _ { \varepsilon } ^ { * } ( x ^ { 1 } | y ^ { d } ) \delta _ { x ^ { * } , x ^ { * } , y ^ { * , M } } \sum _  q _ \end{array}\tag{71}
$$

(Case 2)

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { \hat { r } _ { t } ^ { \downarrow \downarrow D } ( y ^ { \uparrow \downarrow D } | x ^ { \uparrow \downarrow D } ) = r _ { t } ^ { \downarrow \downarrow D } ( x ^ { \downarrow \downarrow D } | y ^ { \downarrow \downarrow D } ) \mathcal { f } \frac { \phi _ { d } ( x ^ { \uparrow D } ) } { { \mathcal { f } _ { d } ( y ^ { \uparrow \downarrow D } ) } } } \\ &  = \overset { D } { \underset { d = 1 } { \overset { D } { \longrightarrow } } } \frac { r _ { t } ^ { \downarrow } ( \alpha ^ { d } | y ^ { d } ) \delta _ { x ^ { \downarrow \downarrow } , y ^ { \downarrow \downarrow } } }  \sum _ { \alpha _ { 0 } ^ { \uparrow \downarrow D } } g _ { 0 \downarrow } ( x _ { 0 } ^ { \uparrow \downarrow D } | y ^ { \downarrow \downarrow D } ) \prod _ { i = 1 } ^ { D } \frac  q _  \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \mathrm { f } \end{array}\tag{72}
$$

Ratio: We now define an estimator $g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \pmb { x } ^ { d } | \pmb { y } ^ { 1 : D } )$ as follows.

$$
g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( { x ^ { d } | y ^ { 1 : D } } ) : = \sum _ { \alpha _ { 0 } ^ { d } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( { x ^ { d } | x _ { 0 } ^ { d } } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( { y ^ { d } | x _ { 0 } ^ { d } } ) } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( { x _ { 0 } ^ { d } | y ^ { 1 : D } } ) \approx \sum _ { x _ { 0 } ^ { d } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( { x ^ { d } | x _ { 0 } ^ { d } } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( { y ^ { d } | x _ { 0 } ^ { d } } ) } q _ { 0 | t } ( { x _ { 0 } ^ { d } | y ^ { 1 : D } } ) = \frac { q _ { t } ( { x ^ { d } | y ^ { \vee } } ) } { q _ { t } ( { y ^ { d } | y ^ { \vee } } ) }\tag{73}
$$

$$
g _ { t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } ^ { 1 : D } | { \pmb y } ^ { 1 : D } ) : = \prod _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( { \pmb x } ^ { d } | { \pmb y } ^ { 1 : D } ) = \sum _ { { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } } \frac { q _ { t | 0 } ( { \pmb x } ^ { 1 : D } | { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } ) } { q _ { t | 0 } ( { \pmb y } ^ { 1 : D } | { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } ) } p _ { 0 | t } ^ { \theta } ( { \pmb x } _ { 0 } ^ { 1 : D } | { \pmb y } ^ { 1 : D } ) \approx \frac { q _ { t } ( { \pmb x } ^ { 1 : D } ) } { q _ { t } ( { \pmb y } ^ { 1 : D } ) }\tag{74}
$$

We can extend the vector formulation Eq. (25) in Proposition 4 to $g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \pmb { x } ^ { d } | \pmb { y } ^ { 1 : D } )$

$$
g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \cdot | x ^ { 1 : D } ) = \frac { 1 } { \langle x ^ { d } , m ^ { d } \rangle } \bigg [ \big ( 1 - \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } \langle f _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( x ^ { 1 : D } ) , x ^ { d } \rangle } { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } + ( 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } ) \langle x ^ { d } , m ^ { d } \rangle } \big ) m ^ { d } + \frac { \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } { 1 - \overline { { \alpha } } _ { t | 0 } } f _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( x ^ { 1 : D } ) \bigg ] \odot ( 1 - x ^ { d } ) + x ^ { d }\tag{75}
$$

Then, we can derive two approximators for transition rate $\hat { r } _ { t } ^ { 1 : D } ( \pmb { y } ^ { 1 : D } | \pmb { x } ^ { 1 : D } )$ as follows.

$$
[ \hat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta , 1 : D } ] ^ { 1 } ( y ^ { 1 : D } | x ^ { 1 : D } ) : = \sum _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } r _ { t } ^ { d } ( { \pmb x } ^ { d } | { \pmb y } ^ { d } ) g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( { \pmb y } ^ { d } | { \pmb x } ^ { 1 : D } ) \cdot \delta _ { { \pmb x } ^ { \vee d } , { \pmb y } ^ { \vee d } } \approx { \mathrm { E q . ~ } } ( 6 7 )\tag{76}
$$

$$
[ \hat { r } _ { t } ^ { \theta , 1 : D } ] ^ { 2 } ( \pmb { y } ^ { 1 : D } | \pmb { x } ^ { 1 : D } ) : = \sum _ { d = 1 } ^ { D } \frac { r _ { t } ^ { d } ( \pmb { x } ^ { d } | \pmb { y } ^ { d } ) } { g _ { t } ^ { \theta , d } ( \pmb { x } ^ { d } | \pmb { y } ^ { 1 : D } ) } \cdot \delta _ { \pmb { x } ^ { \setminus d } , \pmb { y } ^ { \setminus d } } \approx \mathrm { E q . ~ } ( 6 8 )\tag{77}
$$